A PROJECT
REPORT
ON
“Optimization of Railway Reservation System
using Reinforcement Learning”
Submitted in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of
BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY
In
Computer Engineering
GUIDED BY: SUBMITTED BY:
Ms. Archika Jain NABH SHARMA
(ASSISTANT PROFESSOR) NANDINI SINGHAL
NIHARIKA GUPTA
NISHTHA GORANA
RAJASTHAN TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY,KOTA
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER ENGINEERING
POORNIMA COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
SITAPURA, JAIPUR
ISI-,RIICO InstitutionalArea,Sitapura,Jaipur-302022
May -2022
A PROJECT
REPORT
ON
“Optimization of Railway Reservation System
using Reinforcement Learning”
Submitted in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of
BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY
In
Computer Engineering
GUIDED BY: SUBMITTED BY:
MS. ARCHIKA JAIN NABH SHARMA
(ASSISTANT PROFESSOR) NANDINI SINGHAL
NIHARIKA GUPTA
NISHTHA GORANA
RAJASTHAN TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY,KOTA
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER ENGINEERING
POORNIMA COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
SITAPURA, JAIPUR
ISI-,RIICO InstitutionalArea,Sitapura,Jaipur-302022
May -2022




ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to convey my profound sense of reverence and admiration to my supervisor Ms.
Archika Jain Project Guide Department of Computer Engineering, Poornima College of
Engineering, for his intense concern, attention, priceless direction, guidance and encouragement
throughout this research work.
I am grateful to Dr. Mahesh Bundele, Director of Poornima College of Engineering for his
helping attitude with a keen interest in completing this dissertation in time.
I extend my heartiest gratitude to all the teachers, who extended their cooperation to steer the
topic towards its successful completion. I am also thankful to non-teaching staff of the
department to support in preparation of this dissertation work.
My special heartfelt gratitude goes to Dr. Surendra Kumar Yadav, HOD, Department of
Computer Engineering, Manish Dubey, Nikita Jain, Project guide, Department of
Computer Engineering, Poornima College of Engineering, for unvarying support, guidance
and motivation during the course of this research.
I would like to express my deep sense of gratitude towards management of Poornima College of
Engineering including Dr. S. M. Seth, Chairman Emeritus, Poornima Group and former
Director NIH, Roorkee, Shri Shashikant Singhi, Chairman, Poornima Group, Mr. M. K. M.
Shah, Director Admin & Finance, Poornima Group and Ar. Rahul Singhi, Director Poornima
Group for establishment of institute and providing facilities my studies.
I would like to take the opportunity of expressing my thanks to all faculty members of the
Department, for their kind support, technical guidance, and inspiration throughout the course.
I am deeply thankful to my parents and all other family members for their blessings and
inspiration. At last but not least I would like to give special thanks to God who enabled me to
complete my dissertation on time.
Nabh Sharma
Nandini Singhal
Niharika Gupta
Nishtha Gorana
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
The Indian railway is a government organization. The network is one of the largest networks in
the world and is considered the lifeline of the country with almost 70,000 km long tracks, 20,000
passenger trains running on the network providing the essential services to the people on around
7000 stations spread across the country. Along with passenger services, Indian railways also
provide freight services across the country with almost 8700 freight trains on average. It has a huge
chunk of term budget which is provided since it require constant repair and maintenance..
In the fiscal year 2019-20, Indian Railways carried over 20 billion passengers and transported over
3 billion tonnes of freight, and generated a staggering revenue of almost 6 trillion INR.
Interestingly, the freight services account for around 2/3rd of the total revenue. It is also one the
biggest single organization employers. In summary, Indian railways is a gigantic economic
ecosystem. Along with all the cost, it is under substantial burden to be more efficient since the
demand of decent transport across the country grows enormously with each passing year. The
freight traffic is too stressed; so to overcome this, dedicated freight corridors are developed which
will be exclusive to freight traffic. This will drastically reduce the total freight transport time since
currently preference is given to passenger trains which delays the transportation and which in turn
decreases the efficiency of Indian Railways freight system. So extending railway infrastructure to
satisfy the increasing demand can seems to solve the problems. But we can find certain examples
across the world with high investment with no return of investment resulted in low quality across
the network. Alternatively, an equally fruitful approach is to enhance the existing infrastructure
using various automation techniques within the field of artificial intelligence, machine learning
and internet of things. So the rest of the text consist of matters that need to be coped with along
with certain logical (algorithm based) approach which can be efficiently used in the Indian
economics and services context..
PROBLEM STATEMENT
Getting quicker and earliest booking in Indian Railways system is typically a challenge for
passengers. The challenge is to plan an optimization using the most recent technologies which
improves probability of getting a ticket, improving booking time and customer experience
remarkably. Expectation from solution are:
(1) Once a passenger enters origin and destination, probable options and alternatives should be
provided to him, within a predefined/limited time-frame . This might help passengers in getting
confirmed seats.
(2) Additional functionality could be added to help passengers getting confirmed seats, and
improve booking time.
(3) Data available within the general public domain/internet are often employed by students to
approach problems
2.1 POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS
Layover Routes:- The conventional booking system only shows the direct trains if
available between the source and destination. So to provide more alternative routes
to the passengers ,we have suggested an alternative algorithm which shows all the
other feasible routes options with one or more layovers (just like air travel) in
between source and destination keeping various constraints such as total duration of
journey, total cost of journey along with various other constraints which can affect
a passenger’s travel experience.
Early Tatkal Prediction:- Taking into account the time duration of tatkal quota
booking being should out within seconds of opening. We can develop a predictive
model using the previous year data of the same day which will provide us a
probability of getting confirmed tickets in the tatkal slot.
2.2 SCHEDULING
Scheduling is one the most tricky problems in the railway field. Broadly , it can be categorized
into 5 subproblems. The Indian railway system works theoretically as it is meant to consist of a
long string of stations, which connect with each other at Major stations called the Junctions.
Further, Each station contains 1 or more parallel lines, which are assigned to a particular traffic
direction or might be bidirectional. The track between each pair of neighboring stations are
typically called ‘sections’, which allow it to be differentiated from the tracks which are at stations
The section tracks might be bidirectional or fixed direction for the traffic. A typical section in
Indian railway consists of 1 or 2 tracks, a little busy line contains more than 2 tracks which can
further increase as we approach a big junction station.
Currently, these tracks are shared by freight and passenger trains, sometimes reserved for specific
movement.
Datasets Used:
❖ Datasets:
• All Train Schedule
• Intermediate Stations
• Arrival Departure of Trains
• Route Rank
❖ API’s:
• Train between Station i.e. Source and Destination
• Station name to Station code
• Train Live Status
CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
To understand the project topic, various methods can be adopted. We used various research papers
for the references. At the time of the review process of those papers, we used various parameters
to find the best solution approach. A summary of these review papers is presented below:
Summary Review Papers
Paper 1:
[Dr. Ram Sethu et al. 2018] has presented a paper on “A STUDY IN INDIAN RAILWAYS
PASSENGERS RESERVATION SYSTEM”. In this paper, the authors have explored different
issues of implementing smart computing in railway systems pertaining to reservation models. He
discussed the shortcomings of existing Reservation System Model along with architecture for new
model implementation with UID which is UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION which would be obtained
through Aadhar Card and thus removes the hassle of passengers having to enter details and
payment procedure again for each booking. Thus this Proposed Model would reduce the overall
turnaround time for a passenger to book a ticket which reduces the overall overhead for the servers.
The only drawback in this study is it assumes that all the passenger who are booking tickets posses
the facility of mobile phone at ease along which the requirement of one time registration for UID
even if required ticket is booked through Station Window
Paper 2:
[Dr. Reddy et al. 2018] has presented a paper on “Enhancement of Railway Reservation System
Using Internet of Things”.In the present PRS system there are many passenger dilemmas to book
the ticket and railway reservation system to issue the ticket. Passengers must wait on the IRCTC
website for more than 5 minutes to book a ticket. Hence present PRS is updated to smart railway
reservation under the vision of India 2022. The passenger vending machine reads the passenger
details that can be interacted with the railway reservation system to the UIDAI database. The result
proved that passengers obtained the ticket within a fraction of a second, the reservation chart
contains the passengers name with photo, and effective passenger reservations will be maintained.
Paper 3:
[Ankit Malhotra et al. 2014] has presented a paper on “Optimized Proposed Algorithm for Graph
Traversal'' .This paper spotlights an algorithm to traverse a directed or an undirected graph. The
aim here is to hunt out a alternative method which might be invariably applied to all or any kinds
of graphs the algorithm work with traversing the vertex with most outgoing edges first along with
all the neighboring vertices.
If the graph is infinite and there is no solution the algorithm will diverge but within the worst case,
the time complexity is analogous to Breadth First Search (BFS) i.e. the proposed algorithm
possesses to think about all paths to all or any or any possible nodes .So the time complexity will
nlogn in worst case.
Paper 4:
[Akshat Shrivastava et al. 2018] has presented a paper on “RAILBOT: A Railway (IRCTC)
Chatbot”. This paper explains the procedure to develop a Chatbot which will be providing basic
information related services like PNR, seat availability, etc which in turn saves the overall time of
the user to access the above information. They go to repair the bugs and include the railway
complaints and booking information. The key to effective chatbot use is to make sure they enhance
your customer’s experience. This chatbot will benefit the passengers by saving time, memory
space and internet usage.
Paper 5:
[Harshvardhan Mishra and Renuka Sharma et al. 2019] has presented a paper on “Railway
Reservation and Route optimization System". Nowadays Railway is the simplest because it allows
for long journeys as compared to others. this way of transportation is cost effective and appropriate
for travelling. For travelling by railways there is a requirement of advanced reservation. there is a
requirement to implement a system application for reservation tickets. Nowadays everyone desires
to achieve the destination as fast as possible. Thus, one additional feature has been added to the
prevailing reservation system and one can easily get to know which train is that the simplest option
to achieve . Some sorting algorithms are employed with some circumstances. Time for all the trains
has been sorted. Then by selecting this point we'll know which trains are available. The results of
those methods is that, it'd show the train among all the trains at the very best of the list which is
taking less time to achieve the destination. during this paper ‘Rapid Application Development
process model’ has been used. By presumptuous passenger’s necessities an application has been
established, thus all the necessities of passengers are often fulfilled.
Paper 6:
[Xingkui Li ET al.2019] has presented a paper on “Optimizing the Paths of Trains Formed at the
loading area during a Multi-loop Rail Network”. Each loop during a multi-loop rail network
consists of two segments, both of which have roughly the same conditions and mileage and are
approximately symmetrical. This paper is devoted to optimizing the paths of trains formed at the
loading area during a multi-loop rail network. to realize this goal, three different situations are
analyzed, and two models are proposed for networks with adequate and inadequate capabilities.
Two integer applied math models for optimizing the paths of trains formed at the loading area
during a multi-loop rail network are proposed. The model during this paper doesn't need to
determine the trail set beforehand but only must select the arc for each loop and eventually form a
path by connecting each arc. a gaggle of numerical experiments with various rail loops and train
flows are conducted to gauge the performance of the proposed methods. We use the Lingo solver
to unravel the proposed models. For large-scale train flows and rail loops, a genetic
algorithm is supposed . This algorithm performs well in optimizing the paths of large-scale train
flows formed at the loading area during a multi-loop rail network.
Paper 7:
[Hannah Bast et al. 2015] has presented paper on “Route Planning in Transportation
Networks” This survey is an introduction to the state of the art within the world of practical
algorithms for routing in transportation networks. This survey features a broader scope, also
including schedule-based public transportation networks also as multimodal scenarios (combining
schedule-based and unrestricted modes). Considers shortest path algorithms for static networks;
although it focuses on methods that employment well on road networks, they're going to be applied
to arbitrary graphs. Then considers the relative performance of these algorithms on real road
networks, also as how they're going to affect other transportation applications. Consider algorithms
for journey planning on schedule-based public transportation systems (consisting of buses, trains,
and trams, for example), which is kind of different from routing in road networks. (Like time-
dependent components are included publicly transport).Then consider a true multimodal scenario,
which mixes schedule-based means of transportation with less restricted ones, like walking and
cycling. This problem is significantly harder than its individual components, but reasonable
solutions can still be found.
Paper 8:
[Ian Osband et al. 2018] has presented a paper on “Behavior Suite for Reinforcement Learning
”. This paper introduces the Behavior Suite for Reinforcement Learning, or bsuite for brief . Bsuite
could also be a set of carefully-designed experiments that investigate core capabilities of
reinforcement learning (RL) agents with two objectives. First, to collect clear, informative and
scalable problems that capture key issues within the planning of general and efficient learning
algorithms. Second, to review agent behavior through their performance on these shared
benchmarks.
An efficient RL agent must address three challenges simultaneously:
Generalization: be able to learn efficiently from data it collects.
Exploration: prioritize the right experience to seek out from.
Long-term consequences: consider effects beyond just one occasion step.
Paper 9:
[ Mounaim Latif et al. 2016] has presented a paper on “Cross platform approach for mobile
application development: A survey” during this paper a survey of cross-platform creation
approaches with a stress on the MDA (Model Driven Architecture) approach because it's one of
the foremost promising cross platform approaches. The codes to be written once and deployed on
several platforms. Through this, time and price are reduced since the code is written to specialise
in multiple devices. Developers got to maintain the model of the appliance so on lookout of the
native code for each platform.
Paper 10:
[Omoniyi Ajoke et al. 2020] has presented a paper on “Design of a Modified Dijkstra’s Algorithm
for locating alternate routes for shortest-path problems with huge costs”. The classical Dijkstra’s
algorithm has been widely utilized in shortest path problems. it's indeed one of the foremost
referenced shortest path algorithms. However, it's observed that in certain circumstances finding
shortest paths between given nodes could even be achieved at a huge cost especially where time
and efforts are of great consideration. The methodology entailed creation of a document containing
the nodes, edges and probabilities of moving between edges. the chances were generated
employing a random number generation scheme. The contents of the document were read character
by character and thus the proposed Dijkstra’s algorithm. The algorithm was tested employing a
40- node graph; and thus the possible routes were generated. The findings revealed the shortest
route and implies therefore that the proposed modified.
CHAPTER 3
Implementation
The Project is divided into 3 Main Modules:-
1.) Implementation of Reservation System Website
2.) Implementation of Train Search Algorithm
3.) Implementation of Reinforcement Learning Algorithm
Part 1: Implementation of Reservation System Website
The website is based on Django Framework using Python language. A User Interface (UI) is
developed to facilitate the interaction between the user and the website application. It also
improves the efficiency, responsiveness and accessibility of website. We developed the UI taking
the inputs i.e. Source, destination, date, train type and shift, after taking these inputs it will show
the possible alternate routes to the user. We have used Django based on Python for the backend
and Basic HTML, CSS, Bootstrap for the Front-end.
The UI is sleek and basic as to keep the turnaround time in between the search as minimum as
possible since including animations or effects can affect the website performance which was the
key aspect of the project.
Part 2: Implementation of Train Search Algorithm
The Main hurdle was to collect the respective data since Indian railway doesn’t provide an official
API for data collection for private usage. So we had to collect through various public gateways.
After further research we stumbled upon https://indianrailapi.com/ which was a free to use
platform providing data API but since it was free to use; the API provided had a really bad output
efficiency. So we finally decided to store dummy data locally and proceed with our algorithm
which will work on the dummy dataset. We had developed Python Script which worked as a Web
Crawler using a beautiful Soup Library which helped in creation of respective data sets. Due to
Covid-19 circumstances, only special Trains were working at the time of collection of data. So we
have collected data of nearly 13000 railway stations and close to 250 trains which are running in
real time. Since no official API was provided, some of the data had to be manually collected.
We developed an algorithm which would take source and destination from the user and provide
with various possible direct as well as layover routes. The Main idea behind the algorithm is to use
the Real life characteristic that all the trains run in pairs. It starts with finding all the possible
stations which can be reached from the source station all over the India, considering it set A. Again,
repeat the same step with finding all the possible stations which can be reached from the destination
station all over the India, considering it set B. Now after we find the intersection of SET A & SET
B, the resultant set provides us all the possible stations which can be considered a Layover Point
irrespective of its feasibility.
Since we would be providing alternate routes to the user, the provided route is expected to be as
feasible as possible. This includes feasibility factors such as Time, Overall cost of travel and
Passenger Comfort. Time is one of the highest priority when a user is expecting alternate routes,
so we have used different time factors based on the total direct journey duration between source
and destination. Overall Cost of Travel is applied strictly as it can affect the choice of user to
select a particular path. Passenger Comfort is also taken into account which takes woman safety
in account which in turn removes all the routes which have mid – night layover suggestions and
also try to accommodate the layover at the station with all the available facilities.
Part 1: Implementation of Reservation System Website
Reinforcement learning works on a set of learning problems where an agent takes actions in an
environment in order to maximize some defined reward function. Since no previous data of
booking and passenger reservation is provided by Indian Railway, so we had to use reinforcement
learning algorithm here which work on the basic principle of reward function maximization.
So we have defined the basic reward function of (CURRENT RANK+1)/TOTAL ROUTES which
changes when a user confirm the booking of one particular route from all the available routes. This
influences the system to show the most ranked route as more favorable and display it topmost.
This allows the user to select the most favorable routes which also includes routes with least
layovers, with day time layover when travelling with kids or ladies and also cost optimized route
which is the most cost friendly to the user.
Chapter 4
Introduction to Python
Python is an object-oriented language, interpreted, dynamic and multipurpose programming
language.
It was created by Guido Van Rossum in 1989. Like perl, python source code is also available
under GNU general Public License (GPL).
Python is derived from many languages, including ABC, Modula-3, C, C++, Algol-68, small
talk, UNIX shell and other scripted languages.
Many large companies use the python programming languages include NASA, Google,
YouTube
Python Features
There are lots of features provided by python programming languages
• Python is easy to use and a high-level language. Thus, it is a programmer-friendly
language.
• It is more expressive. The sense of expressiveness of the code is easily understandable.
• Python can equally on different platforms such as Windows, Linux, Unix, Macintosh etc.
• It is freely available (www.python.org). The source-code is also available. Therefore, it is
open source.
• Python has a large and broad library.
• Graphical user interfaces can be developed using python.
• It can be easily integrated with languages like C, C++, JAVA etc.
3.1 Python Applications
Python have an extended wide range of applications
⮚ Web Development :- It is extensive used in web development paradigm as it is easy to
use and provide with micro-frameworks which allows fast pace development of any
project
⮚ Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence:- It is also used in ML and AI since it
provides an extended file support and have an large sized community working on to
improve it
⮚ Desktop GUI :- It is also used in desktop GUI development
⮚ Game Development: - It also has libraries such as PySoy which are used for game
development. Example: Civilization-IV, Vega Strike, etc.
3.2 Tokens:
Tokens are the smallest unit of a python program which in turn divides each line into the
smallest lexical component. Each of these tokens is a subpart of a line of code.
There are following tokens in Python:
• Keywords
• Identifiers
• Literals
• Operators
3.2.1 Keywords or Reverse Words
Keywords are special pre-defined words which have specified meaning to the compiler.
List of Keywords used in Python are:
True Try Or Return Pass
Asset For If From Import
Else Finally Elif Del Except
Global Def Class Continue Break
Nonlocal In Not Is Lambda
Raise False None And As
3.2.3. Operators
• Arithmetic Operators
• Relational Operators
• Assignment Operators
• Logical Operators
• Membership Operators
• Identity Operators
• Bitwise Operators
Arithmetic Operators:
// Integer Divide
+ Addition
- Subtraction
* Multiplication
/ Division
% return remainder
** Exponent
Relational Operators:
< Less than
> Greater than
<= Less than or equal to
>= Greater than equal to
== Equal to
!= Not equal to
<> Not equal to (similar to !=)
Logical Operators:
And Logical AND
Or Logical OR
Not Logical NOT
Identity Operators:
is Returns true if identity of two operands are same, else false
is not Returns true if identity of two operands are not same, else false
Table 2.7. identity operators
3.3 Comments
• comment (single line):
Put # in the starting of the line of code
#example for this type of comment
• comment (Multiple Line):
It can be written inside triple quates.
””” Here
Is
Multiple line comment”””
Assigning values to Variable
Assigning single value to multiple variables
x=y=z=50
print x
print y
print z
O/p
50
50
50
Assigning multiple values to multiple variables
a, b, c=5, 10, 15
print a
print b
print c
O/p
5
10
15
3.4 Selective Statements
The if statement is a condition checker point in a program which is executed if the condition
mentioned is True or in case of False the else portion is executed if any
Simple if
if (conditions):
statements
if with else
if (conditions):
statements
else:
statements
Ladder if
if statement:
body
elif statements:
body
else:
body
Iteration
• While
• For
While Loop
It is also a conditional checker statement with a body of its own which in turn is executed
consecutively until the condition specified is satisfied.
while <expression>:
body
Example
a=10
while a>0:
print” Value of a is”, a
a=a-2
CHAPTER 5
Machine Learning
5.1 Supervised learning:
Supervised learning is the place where you've input factors (x) and a yield variable (Y) and you
utilize a calculation to fit within the design capacity from the contribution to the yield.
Y = f(X)
The objective is to surmise the planning capacity so well that when you've got new info
information (x) that you simply simply can foresee the yield factors (Y) for that information. It's
called regulated learning on the grounds that the cycle of a calculation gained from the
preparation dataset is often thought of as an educator administering the training cycle. We all
know the right answers, the calculation iteratively makes forecasts on the preparation
information and is adjusted by the trainer . Learning stops when the calculation accomplishes a
worthy degree of execution.
5.1.1 linear regression
Linear Regression is an appealing model on the grounds that the portrayal is so straightforward.
The portrayal could also be a straight condition that joins a selected arrangement of knowledge
esteems (x) the answer that's that the anticipated yield for that set of data esteems (y). Therein
capacity, both the info esteems (x) and thus the yield esteem are numeric. The direct condition
doles out one multiplier to each information worth or segment, called a coefficient and spoken to
by the capital Greek letter Beta (B). One extra coefficient is likewise added, giving the road a
further level of opportunity (for example going here and there on a two-dimensional plot) and is
typically called the block or the predisposition coefficient.
5.1.2 KNN
KNN are often used for both classification and regression predictive problems. However, it's
more widely utilized in classification problems within the industry. to gauge any technique, we
generally inspect 3 important aspects:
1. Ease to interpret output
2. Calculation time
3. Predictive Power
5.1.3 Logistic Regression
Logistic Regression could also be a directed learning arrangement calculation used to anticipate
the likelihood of an objective variable. the thought of target or ward variable is dichotomous,
which suggests there would be just two potential classes. In basic words, the reliant variable is
double in nature having information coded together or the other 1 (represents achievement/yes)
or 0 (represents disappointment/no).
Numerically, a strategic relapse model predicts P(Y=1) as a component of X. It's one of the
littlest amount of complex ML calculations which can be utilized for various grouping issues, as
an example , spam recognition, Diabetes expectation, malignant growth location then forth.
5.1.4 NAIVE BAYES
It is a characterization strategy enthusiastic to Bayes' theorem with a supposition of autonomy
among indicators. In straightforward terms, a Naive Bayes classifier expects that the presence of
a specific element during a category is random to the presence of another element.
For instance, a natural product might be viewed as an apple within the event that it's red, round,
and around 3 crawls in measurement. regardless of whether these highlights depend upon one
another or upon the presence of varied highlights, these properties autonomously increase the
likelihood that this organic product is an apple which is that the rationale it's mentioned as
'Gullible'
5.2 Unsupervised Machine Learning
Unsupervised learning is the place where you simply have input information (X) and no
comparing yield factors. The target for unsupervised learning is to mean the essential structure or
appropriation within the knowledge to become familiar with the knowledge . These are called
unsupervised learning in light of the actual fact that not within the least like managed learning
above there are no right answers and there is no instructor. Calculations are left to their own
devices to hunt out and present the fascinating structure with regards to the knowledge .
5.3 NLP (Natural Language Processing)
Natural Language Processing, or NLP for brief , is comprehensively characterized because the
programmed control of characteristic language, almost like discourse and text, by programming.
The investigation of tongue preparing has been around for over 50 years and outgrew the world
of etymology with the ascent of PCs.
CHAPTER 6
DATA SCIENCE
Data science is a paradigm that is combination of fundamental mathematical knowledge based
on statistics along with programming skills which allows us to extract a deep understanding
objectives from data. Data science usually works by application of various machine learning
algorithms to various data sources i.e. texts, numbers, images, video, audio, etc. to train an
artificial intelligence model which performs tasks which generally require human intelligence.
6.2 Pandas
Pandas is a python package which provides flexible ,swift data structures which are designed
specifically for working with ‘labeled’ data. It is developed with an aim to act as a high level
building block for doing various world data analysis in Python. Currently, the community is been
working towards a broader goal of making pandas a versatile open source and a very powerful
open source tool which would be available in various languages. and it is on its way towards the
desired goal.
Some of the major features of Pandas are:
1. inserting or removing column in data structure
2. reshaping data sets
3. dealing with missing data
4. performing various split combine operations for data reshaping
5. large dataset label slicing operations
6. reading data from various file storage formats such as XML, CSV, etc.
Some of the major application of pandas:-
1. Economics
2. Recommendation System
3. Stock prediction
4. Advertising
5. Statistics
6. Big Data
7. Analytics
8. Data Science
9. Natural Language Processing
6.3 Matplotlib
Matplotlib may be a tremendous visualization library in Python for 2D plots of arrays. Matplotlib
could also be a multi-platform data visualization library built on NumPy arrays and designed to
work with the broader SciPy stack. it had been introduced by John Hunter within the year 2002.
One of the simplest benefits of visualization is that it allows us visual access to large amounts of
data in easily digestible visuals. Matplotlib consists of several plots like line, bar, scatter,
histogram etc.
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion and Future Scope
Conquering the difficulties faced by the Indian Railways system with respect to booking, we have
effectively executed the initial step of our proposed solution. This progression would give
simplicity to the passengers in getting a confirmed booking when they enter the origin and
destination, by giving probable options and alternatives routes to reach their desired destination.
Future Scope
● Improvements in the conventional train between station algorithms used by using
specifically generated constraints by the choice of the user.
● Prediction of new train routes using the data obtained by the booking algorithms
● Improve the overall user experience at the time of booking and significantly reduce the
booking time taken.
